---
title: 'protHMM: An R Package for Protein Feature Extraction using Profile Hidden
  Markov Models'
tags:
- R
- feature extraction
- proteins
date: "6 July 2023"
output:
  pdf_document: default
  html_document:
    df_print: paged
bibliography: References.bib
authors:
- name: Shayaan M. Emran
  orcid: "0009-0009-4222-1104"
  equal-contrib: yes
  affiliation: '1'
  corresponding: yes
affiliations:
- name: College of William and Mary, Williamsburg, Virginia
  index: 1
---

# Summary

Proteins are one of the fundamental building blocks of life, involved in almost every process or reaction. As such, the study of protein structure and function is necessary to help understand more about newly discovered proteins. A number of biological methods are used to determine protein structure and function such as fluorescence microscopy and X-ray crystallography. However, these methods are time consuming; thus, a number of computational methods have been, and continue to be developed to identify protein structure and function. The development of these methods help us understand proteins and their complex biological functions for use in downstream tasks such as novel drug discovery.

Many of these methods rely on a key piece: the features extracted from the proteins used to train the model. protHMM implements 20 different feature extraction methods from HMM representation of proteins for use in such models. Several methods have been ported for use with HMMs from PSSMs, while others were used with HMMs originally. Examples of features implemented in protHMM include the CHMM vector [@an-2019], the bigrams and trigrams vectors [@lyons-2015], singular value decomposition [@song-2018] and the separated dimers vector [@saini-2015]. A full list of features and uses is covered in the Features section.

Installation of protHMM can be done through the official CRAN repository using the command `install.packages("protHMM")`. 

# Statement of need

Lyons et al. (2015) and Xia et al. (2017) have both shown the useful of features derived from HMM representations of proteins in bioinformatics tasks such as protein fold classification. However, there are limited software implementations of the feature extraction methods discussed in the aforementioned papers. 

protHMM implements a comprehensive library of feature extraction methods to apply to profile hidden markov model (HMM) representations of proteins. protHMM implements features used for subcellular localization, protein-protein interaction, protein structural class predication, and protein fold classification. This implementation allows profile hidden markov model representations of proteins generated by HHBlits and HMMer to be used smoothly in the bioinformatics workflow. 

PSSMCOOL is a similar package to protHMM which extracts feature sets from Position Specific Scoring Matrices (PSSMs). PSSMCOOL currently implements more feature extraction techniques than protHMM; however, PSSMCOOL is only able to extract information from PSSMs and thus cannot take advantage of the alignment benefits that HHBlits and HMMer provide over NCBI-BLAST [@xia-2017]. Furthermore, `protHMM` implements many different novel feature extraction techniques such as Local Binary Pattern and Lyons et al.'s (2016) alignment-based similarity feature. 

# Features

The features implemented in protHMM can be split into categories based upon the original use of the feature etraction method. The categories include features used for protein fold classification, protein-protein interaction prediction, protein structural class prediction and a miscellaneous category for use cases with a small number of feature extraction techniques.

The category of features originally used for protein fold classification includes the autocovariance and cross covariance vectors [@dong-2009], the bigrams and trigrams vectors [@lyons-2015], the alignment distance between proteins [@lyons-2016] and the separated dimers vector [@saini-2015]. The category with features used for protein-protein interaction prediction is composed of the CHMM vector [@an-2019], the FP_HMM vector [@zahiri-2013], Local Binary Pattern [@li-2019], the SCSH vectors [@mohammadi-2022] and singular value decomposition [@song-2018]. The category of features used for protein structural class prediction includes the Moreau-Broto, Moran and Geary autocorrelation vectors [@liang-2015], the Single Average Group Vector [@nanni-2014] and the HMM_LPC vector [@qin-2015], which uses linear predictive coding the extract features. 

The general category includes the HMM_GSD vector [@jin-2021], used for sub cellular localization, the smoothed HMM feature vector, used by @feng-2013 for ligand-binding site prediction, and two feature vectors based on a psuedo-HMM concept, which is ported from the pseudo PSSM created by @chou-2007. The improved pseudo HMM vector, ported from @ruan-2020, was originally used for the prediction of apoptosis proteins, while the pseudo HMM vector proted from @chou-2007 was originally used for membrane protein prediction.

# Dependencies

protHMM relies on the utils package for the reading of HMM profiles into R. protHMM also relies on the phonTools package, the stats package and the gtools package for the calculation feature vectors such as GSD. LPC and SCSH.

# References
